Paper: Scientific Publishing with MyST Markdown (#918)
scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings: papers/cockett_etal/article.md

---

## Introduction and Motivation

In the face of mounting global challenges such as climate change, pandemics, and water security, the imperative for rapid, effective scientific discovery and dissemination has never been more acute. The pace at which these problems evolve and impact societies worldwide demands an equally dynamic and innovative approach to how scientific research is published. Despite significant advancements in technology that enhance data collection, analysis, and workflow efficiency, the mechanisms through which scientific knowledge is shared have remained largely unchanged for decades [@10.4230/DagMan.1.1.41]. The prevalent reliance on static PDF formats for research papers starkly contrasts with the complex, data-driven and increasingly computational nature of modern science, creating bottlenecks in knowledge dissemination and uptake.

> This paper documents some of the design decisions made to address these challenges within two integrated tools: (1) MyST Markdown (Markedly Structured Text, <https://mystmd.org>), a community-run open-source project[^myst-jep], which is a text-based authoring framework that integrates computational content (e.g. Jupyter Notebooks); and (2) Curvenote (<https://curvenote.com>), which is a set of open-source utilities, command-line tools, actions and services[^curvenote] aimed to improve scientific publishing by journals, societies, lab-groups, and individuals. In this article we provide background, motivation and perspective for our efforts in developing new open-source tools for science communication as well as provide examples individuals, lab-groups, proceedings, and society journals. We give an overview of MyST Markdown but would like to reiterate that MyST Markdown is a community-run project, we do not speak for all of the participants, and the community has varied goals for the project (including API documentation, community guidelines, educational tutorials). Our focus in this article is to give our perspectives on scientific writing and publishing and how it intersects with these open-community projects in addition to the open-source efforts that Curvenote is undertaking around scientific publishing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This paper documents some of the design decisions made to address these challenges within two integrated tools: (1) MyST Markdown (Markedly Structured Text, <https://mystmd.org>), a community-run open-source project[^myst-jep], which is a text-based authoring framework that integrates computational content (e.g. Jupyter Notebooks); and (2) Curvenote (<https://curvenote.com>), which is a set of open-source utilities, command-line tools, actions and services[^curvenote] aimed to improve scientific publishing by journals, societies, lab-groups, and individuals. In this article we provide background, motivation and perspective for our efforts in developing new open-source tools for science communication, with examples ranging from individual authors to journal administrators. We give an overview of MyST Markdown but would like to reiterate that MyST Markdown is a community-run project, we do not speak for all of the participants, and the community has varied goals for the project (including API documentation, community guidelines, educational tutorials). Our focus in this article is to give our perspectives on scientific writing and publishing and how it intersects with these open-community projects in addition to the open-source efforts that Curvenote is undertaking around scientific publishing.
```

This addresses a typo: "...tools for science communication as well as _provide examples individuals_, lab-groups, proceedings, and society journals" while also eliminating some duplication from the previous sentence.

[^curvenote]: Curvenote is a company that provides many different tools for authoring and publishing content, including a collaborative WYSIWYG online editor that can export to MyST Markdown. In this article we only discuss our open-source tools as well as highlight relevant experiences from Curvenote's partners when they relate to general ideas for improving scientific publishing.

Our goals in developing these integrated tools and workflows address the related challenges of _authoring_ and _publishing_ in the context of computational, open-science documents and lowering the barrier to continuously releasing and iterating on scientific ideas in the open. Introducing authoring tools that allow for structured, interactive and computational content as researchers are writing can additionally change the way it is checked, shared and published — enabling faster iterations and direct ties to reproducible, interactive content.

(sec:structured-science)=

### Authoring Structured Content

> There are currently many challenges for individuals or groups to author research information that can be shared in a structured and rigorous way. By this we mean the things that _structurally_ set a scientific article apart from, for example, a blog post: structured content, cross-references, valid citations with persistent identifiers (PIDs), and standardized metadata for licensing, funding information, authors and affiliations. This structured content and metadata as well as the standards behind them are what defines the "scientific record" and enables archiving, discoverability, accessibility, interoperability and the ability to reuse or cite content [@10.1038/sdata.2016.18].

Reviewer: Here, we are explaining how "structure" is a critical component of published research, and part of that is "structured content" - this is a little circular. What actually is "structured content?" Well-defined sections like Introduction, Conclusion, etc? Or machine readability (e.g. XML, JSON)?

One metric for measuring the difficulty of satisfying these scientific standards is to look at the direct costs that are spent on transforming author submissions (e.g. a PDF or a Word Document) into something that conforms to these standards and is ultimately archived.

> In scientific publishing, about 15% of Article Processing Charges (APCs) go to direct publication costs[^pub-costs] [@10.12688/f1000research.27468.2], which provides a _very_ rough global estimate of over USD\$2 billion dollars[^pub-revenue] that is spent on transforming author submissions (e.g. a word-document, LaTeX, or a PDF) into a copyedited, well-formatted, typeset document that can be archived with appropriate metadata [@10.4045/tidsskr.20.0118]; this estimate does not include the approximately USD\$230 million spent on reformatting articles by scientists _before_ publication [@10.1186/s12916-023-02882-y]. Many of these processes are hidden from authors[^hidden-processes] as well as actionable access to the many of the benefits of structured data beyond citation graphs (e.g. "How many citations did this paper get?").

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In scientific publishing, about 15% of Article Processing Charges (APCs) go to direct publication costs[^pub-costs] [@10.12688/f1000research.27468.2], which provides a _very_ rough global estimate of over USD\$2 billion dollars[^pub-revenue] that is spent on transforming author submissions (e.g. a word-document, LaTeX, or a PDF) into a copyedited, well-formatted, typeset document that can be archived with appropriate metadata [@10.4045/tidsskr.20.0118]; this estimate does not include the approximately USD\$230 million spent on reformatting articles by scientists _before_ publication [@10.1186/s12916-023-02882-y]. Many of these processes are hidden from authors[^hidden-processes] as well as actionable access to many of the benefits of structured data beyond citation graphs (e.g. "How many citations did this paper get?").
```

[^zero-cost]: The cost of transforming author submissions to produce structured content and metadata should approach zero, at least for a subset of users. For example, _technical_ users who can use open-source command-line tools like MyST Markdown and GitHub. This has been shown to be the case for the Journal of Open Source Software (JOSS), for example, which has very low direct-publication costs per article [@10.7717/peerj-cs.147].

(sec:computational-articles)=

### Computational Articles

> A compounding challenge to scientific publishing that we are exploring through MyST Markdown and Curvenote is how to deeply integrate computational workflows and content into science communication to promote interactive explorations and reproducible practices. There are a host of challenges to from user-interface design, to maintenance, to archiving computational content. Many other tools have worked on aspects of integrating computation into scientific articles, notably R-Markdown [@10.1201/9781138359444] and it's successor Quarto (<https://quarto.org>); both of these projects have similar aims to MyST Markdown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A compounding challenge to scientific publishing that we are exploring through MyST Markdown and Curvenote is how to deeply integrate computational workflows and content into science communication to promote interactive explorations and reproducible practices. There are a host of challenges from user-interface design, to maintenance, to archiving computational content. Many other tools have worked on aspects of integrating computation into scientific articles, notably R-Markdown [@10.1201/9781138359444] and it's successor Quarto (<https://quarto.org>); both of these projects have similar aims to MyST Markdown.
```

From a user-experience goals perspective, we are interested in questions such as:

- how to make a change in a notebook figure and have that immediately show up in a document?
- how to ensure that a p-value, for example, is computed and inserted directly from a computation, rather than through copy-and-paste?
- how to expose interactivity and exploration that a researcher often has when analyzing a data-set?
- how to provide and launch archived interactive computing environments?

These questions require authoring tools to be able to execute content, to integrate and display computational/interactive outputs directly in reading experiences, as well as scientific publishing systems that can understand and archive computational content (e.g. Docker containers).
This deep integration can open up possibilities of embedding interactive visualizations and computational notebooks directly into scientific documents [e.g. @eg:interactivity], transforming articles from static texts into rich, interactive, reproducible narratives.

> In 2023, the authors helped to lead several working groups related to these challenges _Notebooks Now!_, a Sloan Foundation funded project led by the American Geophysical Union.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In 2023, the authors helped to lead several working groups related to these challenges as part of _Notebooks Now!_, a Sloan Foundation funded project led by the American Geophysical Union.
```

> Those working groups found that integrating computational documents, via Jupyter Notebooks, into scholarly publishing system requires a re-imagination of the publishing processes (from submission to peer-review to production to reading) and that many existing processes, platforms are ill-equipped to handle computational articles [c.f. @10.1029/2023EA003458].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Those working groups found that integrating computational documents, via Jupyter Notebooks, into scholarly publishing system requires a re-imagination of the publishing processes (from submission to peer-review to production to reading) and that many existing processes and platforms are ill-equipped to handle computational articles [c.f. @10.1029/2023EA003458].
```

% Current research incentives are focused on article publishing rather than research communication and sharing findings as early and as often as possible.

### Article Outline

For research-communication to be transformative on a similar scale as open-source, researchers require modern tools for authoring and publishing.
There are two inter-related capabilities that are necessary for this transition:

1. authoring mediums that support data, computation and structured content without the need for expensive typesetting; and
2. publishing that is open and accessible to researchers at a variety of scales – individual publishing, lab-groups, societies and institutions.

Through the lens of MyST Markdown and Curvenote, this paper will explore how these tools can help to address critical gaps in current scientific publishing practices. Our motivation is to enhance the _speed_ and _impact_ of research dissemination, fostering a scientific ecosystem that is more collaborative, reproducible, and equipped to tackle the urgent global challenges of our time.

(sec:authoring)=

## Authoring Tools

> MyST Markdown (Markedly Structured Text, <https://mystmd.org>) is a community-driven markup language that is a superset of [CommonMark](https://commonmark.org/) (a standard form of Markdown) with special syntax for citations, cross-references, and block and inline extension points called "directives" and "roles". The block-level content provides multi-line containers surrounded by either backticks or colons; examples include callout panels, figures, equations and tables (see [documentation](https://mystmd.org)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MyST Markdown (Markedly Structured Text, <https://mystmd.org>) is a community-driven markup language that is a superset of [CommonMark](https://commonmark.org/) (a standard form of Markdown) with special syntax for citations, cross-references, and block and inline extension points called "directives" and "roles". The block-level content provides multi-line containers surrounded by either backticks or colons; examples include callout panels, figures, equations and tables (see [documentation](https://mystmd.org)). There is also specialized support for the types of metadata that are important to collect for scientific articles (funding, ORCIDs, CRediT Roles, etc.).
In 2022, the Executable Books project (<https://executablebooks.org>, which hosts Jupyter Book and MyST) started work on the `mystmd` command line interface (CLI), which was initially developed as the [Curvenote CLI](https://github.com/curvenote/curvenote), and later transferred to the ExecutableBooks project. This tool allows authors writing in MyST Markdown to easily build websites and documents and supports the JupyterLab MyST plugin.
```

MyST is influenced by [reStructuredText (RST)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/reStructuredText) and [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org) – pulling on the nomenclature and introducing additional standards where appropriate.
There are also many similarities of MyST Markdown to R-Markdown [@10.1201/9781138359444], Pandoc, and Quarto (<https://quarto.org>), especially in citation syntax and frontmatter structure.
The initial use case driving the development and design of MyST Markdown has been [JupyterBook](https://jupyterbook.org), which can create educational online textbooks and tutorials with Jupyter Notebooks and narrative content written in MyST.

> In 2022, the Executable Books project (<https://executablebooks.org>, which hosts Jupyter Book and MyST) started work on `mystmd` command line interface (CLI), which was initially developed as the [Curvenote CLI](https://github.com/curvenote/curvenote), and later transferred to the ExecutableBooks project. At its core, MyST adheres to the [CommonMark](https://commonmark.org/) standard, ensuring a familiar foundation for those versed in traditional Markdown. However, MyST distinguishes itself through the introduction of specialized syntax aimed at facilitating scientific discourse including citations, cross-references, figures, proofs, equations, and tables. There is also specialized support for the types of metadata that are important to collect for scientific articles (funding, ORCIDs, CRediT Roles, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This paragraph has a lot of repetition from the previous paragraphs in this section. With a few small, suggested additions to the previous paragraphs, I think we can just remove this one.

```

::::

### Single Source to Many Outputs

These capabilities of cross-references, typography and embedding visualizations and data-frames are complemented by an single-source export system that supports professional article templates and JATS XML [@fig:export]. This is referred to as single-source publishing [c.f. @10.1109/MITP.2003.1176491], however, many implementations in scientific publishing focus first on manual translation to XML (e.g. from Word or LaTeX), rather than on an author-facing implementation.

:::{figure} ./images/myst-build.png
:label: fig:export
Export to PDF using LaTeX or Typst is supported for hundreds of different journal templates in addition to Microsoft Word or JATS XML, which is used throughout scientific publishing.
:::

With single-source publishing, we can rely on rich transformations of the source content that can create professional PDFs, interactive HTML, and structured metadata such as JATS XML, which is the current standard for scientific archiving and text-mining.

(sec:publishing)=

## Publishing

> There are many ways to publish a MyST Markdown site. The native way that MyST is represented is through content-as-data, which is a collection of JSON files that represent the full documents and all associated metadata (if you are reading this online, you can add a `.json` to the URL to access the content), and enables dynamic serving of the content in a number of ways and when run locally, the MyST content server is dynamically creating HTML based on these JSON files (very similar to XML-based single source publishing [@10.1109/MITP.2003.1176491], but using modern web-tooling). This server-side approach has a number of advantages, in that it allows you to maintain a journal/site theme, without having to upgrade or rebuild all content as would be required by static tooling. It also puts content addressability as a first class concern (via the `.json`), enabling global cross referencing and opening up opportunities for varied publishing models in future. This is the approach that we take with Curvenote journals, and provide managed services to maintain journal sites, manage and curate content, as well as provide the editorial management tools and workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many ways to publish a MyST Markdown site. The native way that MyST is represented is through content-as-data, a collection of JSON files that represent the full documents and all associated metadata (if you are reading this online, you can add a `.json` to the URL to access the content). This MyST content may be served alongside an independent website theme, which dynamically creates HTML based on these JSON files (very similar to XML-based single source publishing [@10.1109/MITP.2003.1176491], but using modern web-tooling). This server-side approach has a number of advantages, in that it allows you to maintain a journal/site theme, without having to upgrade or rebuild all content as would be required by static tooling. It also puts content addressability as a first class concern (via the `.json`), enabling global cross referencing and opening up opportunities for varied publishing models in future. This is the approach that we take with Curvenote journals, and provide managed services to maintain journal sites, manage and curate content, as well as provide the editorial management tools and workflows.
```

The second sentence of this paragraph was very long and confusing. Is anything important lost in my suggested edit? (For example, I removed "when run locally" - does that distinction matter?)

[^also-latex]: LaTeX is also supported by parsing and rendering directly with the `mystmd` CLI, this is completed through [`@unified-latex`](https://github.com/siefkenj/unified-latex).

(sec:checks)=

### Structural Checks

The open-source Curvenote CLI (https://github.com/curvenote/curvenote) provides checks for the structure of a document to ensure it meets automated quality controls for things like references, valid links, author identifiers (e.g. ORCID), or funding information. Executing `curvenote check` in a MyST project will build the project and use the structured data to assess metadata (e.g. do authors provide ORCIDs), structural checks (e.g. does the article have an abstract; is the article below a word count?), and check that references have valid DOIs.

> We have designed these checks in a similar pattern to linting and/or unit-tests in scientific software, which continually give feedback on the structural-health of a code-base with near immediate feedback to authors [@eg:checks]. Authors can take action to improve their metadata directly, including DOIs, CRediT Roles, ORCIDs and structural checks such as word-count or missing sections. For example, in the SciPy Proceedings in 2024, which used Curvenote checks for their submission system, required and optional metadata was improved by authors reacting to these automated checks without any intervention from the proceedings editorial team (e.g. [](https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/915) added CRediT roles, ORCIDs abbreviations, and DOIs to get a passing check [See @fig:actions]). This is a low-friction way of improving metadata at the time of authoring or submission to elevate content to standards the standards that are required for a certain type of publication (e.g. proceedings vs blog post vs peer-reviewed journal).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have designed these checks in a similar pattern to linting and/or unit tests in scientific software, which continually give feedback on the structural health of a codebase with near immediate feedback to authors [@eg:checks]. Authors can take action to improve their metadata directly, including DOIs, CRediT Roles, ORCIDs and structural checks such as word count or missing sections. For example, in the SciPy Proceedings in 2024, which used Curvenote checks for their submission system, required and optional metadata was improved by authors reacting to these automated checks without any intervention from the proceedings editorial team (e.g. [](https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/915) added CRediT roles, ORCIDs abbreviations, and DOIs to get a passing check [See @fig:actions]). This is a low-friction way of improving metadata at the time of authoring or submission to elevate content to the standards that are required for a certain type of publication (e.g. proceedings vs blog post vs peer-reviewed journal).
```

This removes a few excessive hyphens and fixes the typo "...content to ~standards~ the standards that are..."

```

::::

(sec:automation)=

### Automated Actions

Upon submission of there are a number of checks that are run and a submission or draft is deployed to Curvenote's platform, which stores the structured MyST project. We utilized GitHub Actions to automate initial checks and generate previews of submissions (via https://github.com/curvenote/actions). The actions automatically generate a preview of the manuscript exactly as it would appear in publication using MyST Markdown, and these are linked within the pull request comments for easy access by reviewers [@fig:actions].

```{figure} ./images/gh-commits-and-checks.png
:label: fig:actions
:class: framed
An example of a comment by a GitHub action, which shows the checks and preview of the article directly. The checks in this example have promoted the author to improve metadata, see [](https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/911).
```

### Enabling Researchers

Although SciPy submissions are made in a central repository, the Curvenote checks can be setup on any repository.

> As MyST Markdown bring a researcher's writing back into a simple text based format, and if they are working with Jupyter notebooks, integrates directly with their computational analysis and results, a researcher's manuscript can be easily created and maintained as an integral part of their research code base and updated in lock step with it. Imagine writing your next paper for submission to SciPy in a way where your draft was automatically rebuilt with the latest figures and data tables on every push to `main`, and any issues that you would hit on submission are flagged as they happen and so are more easily fixed, in context. This is just one of the ways that continuous science practices we spoke about in [@sec:continuous-science] can lead to radically improved efficiencies at scale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As MyST Markdown brings a researcher's writing back into a simple text based format, and if they are working with Jupyter notebooks, integrates directly with their computational analysis and results, a researcher's manuscript can be easily created and maintained as an integral part of their research code base and updated in lock step with it. Imagine writing your next paper for submission to SciPy in a way where your draft was automatically rebuilt with the latest figures and data tables on every push to `main`, and any issues that you would hit on submission are flagged as they happen and so are more easily fixed, in context. This is just one of the ways that continuous science practices we spoke about in [@sec:continuous-science] can lead to radically improved efficiencies at scale.
```

> Curvenote's tools builds on this theme of enabling researchers to do more and to have more visibility into how their work will appear when submitted and published. The previews generated during the journal submission process, or by the actions on a researchers own repo can also be generated by an author at any time. By running `curvenote submit <journal> --draft` researchers can get a set of check results and a preview in the style of that venue, and where submissions of Computational Articles are permitted, authors and reviewers will even get feedback on reproducible environment check that any interactive figures and notebooks execute as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Curvenote's tools build on this theme of enabling researchers to do more and to have more visibility into how their work will appear when submitted and published. The previews generated during the journal submission process, or by the actions on a researchers own repo can also be generated by an author at any time. By running `curvenote submit <journal> --draft` researchers can get a set of check results and a preview in the style of that venue, and where submissions of Computational Articles are permitted, authors and reviewers will even get feedback on reproducible environment check that any interactive figures and notebooks execute as expected.
```

In this article we have presented some of the goals behind features of MyST Markdown and Curvenote, to support new open-science infrastructure including authoring tools as well as publishing workflows that support checks and automation. To support every next-generation research tool on top of open access knowledge, we need access to **high-quality, structured content**, data and software — not just the scholarly metadata and citation graph. Our goal of contributing to MyST Markdown is to make the processes behind creating this structured data more accessible and affordable. These tools in the hands of researchers can also enable process changes and **continuous science** practices: where checking and automation can support rapid iterations and feedback. The analogies between continuous delivery of software and continuous science give us an opportunity to peek ahead a decade to an analogous future and draw on many learnings on how to organize and focus infrastructure to get the best out of our scientific community.

> There is, of course, an _enormity_ of work ahead of these tools to transform science publishing at scale. We are grateful to our society partners who are changing community practices around publishing to support HTML-first publishing, experimenting with computational articles, and implementing new peer-review workflows. Tools on their own do not make change, but can help to enable it. Improvements to scientific publishing requires many diverse community efforts to improve the quality and speed of how we communicate knowledge, and ultimately to accelerate scientific progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is, of course, an _enormity_ of work ahead of these tools to transform science publishing at scale. We are grateful to our society partners who are changing community practices around publishing to support HTML-first publishing, experimenting with computational articles, and implementing new peer-review workflows. Tools on their own do not make change, but can help to enable it. Improvements to scientific publishing require many diverse community efforts to improve the quality and speed of how we communicate knowledge, and ultimately to accelerate scientific progress.
```

---

> title: Transformative Approaches in Scientific Publishing

Reviewer 2: As @natesjacobs mentioned, I would also suggest a more specific title to be more accurate and attract more audience.

Author: I have refined this to focus more on the tools:

`Continuous Tools for Scientific Publishing: Using MyST Markdown and Curvenote to encourage continuous science practices`

abstract: |

>   Difficult problems that are globally relevant and urgent - like climate change, pandemics, and water security - require us to radically rethink how we publish and work on scientific breakthroughs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Difficult problems that are globally relevant and urgent — like climate change, pandemics, and water security — require us to radically rethink how we publish and work towards scientific breakthroughs.
```

Author: added.

>   Difficult problems that are globally relevant and urgent - like climate change, pandemics, and water security - require us to radically rethink how we publish and work on scientific breakthroughs.

Reviewer 2: You can probably elaborate a bit more on what specific aspects of "Difficult problems" call for rethinking publication. Is this because of the complexity of the problem, large-scale collaboration, higher stakes, etc? The next sentence explains a bit but the link can be strengthened here (if this is the first sentence especially)

Author: I have revamped the abstract locally to make this clearer!

>   Advances in technology for data workflows have increased the speed and scope of scientific discovery.

Reviewer 2: I think this sentence provides a stronger motivation than the first sentence.

Author: I have moved this first (locally, will push shortly). Thanks.

>   However, scientific dialogue still uses outdated technology for communicating and sharing knowledge, relying on static PDFs that are a poor representation of the complexities of science.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  However, scientific dialogue still uses outdated technology for communicating and sharing knowledge, relying on static PDFs that poorly represent the complexities of science.
```

Author: Applied - thank you.

>   This gap impedes the speed of research dissemination, reuse, and uptake: we require new mediums to compose ideas and ways to share research findings as early and as often as possible; this gap is even more evident in the computational sciences.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This gap impedes the speed of research dissemination, reuse, and uptake; we require new mediums to compose ideas and ways to share research findings as early and as often as possible. This gap is even _more_ evident in the computational sciences.
```

Emphasis OK?

Author: Going to leave as is.

>   In this paper we discuss two tools for scientific dialogue, MyST Markdown and Curvenote, and illustrate examples of improving metadata, the reading experience, and transforming publishing practices for individuals and societies.

Reviewer 2: I think given that the title has the word "transformative" this reasoning can be strengthened. For now, "improving metadata, the reading experience" is why these tools are "transformative", and I am wondering whether the reason is strong enough (providing some details might be helpful?)

I see that the first few paragraphs of the introduction summarizes this well, so maybe bringing some elements from there might be helpful.

Author: I have brought up elements discussing computation, interactivity and automation through continuous practices.

---

## Introduction and Motivation

In the face of mounting global challenges such as climate change, pandemics, and water security, the imperative for rapid, effective scientific discovery and dissemination has never been more acute.
The pace at which these problems evolve and impact societies worldwide demands an equally dynamic and innovative approach to how scientific research is published.

> Despite significant advancements in technology that enhance data collection, analysis, and workflow efficiency, the mechanisms through which scientific knowledge is shared have remained largely unchanged for decades [@10.4230/DagMan.1.1.41].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Despite significant advancements in technologies that enhance data collection, analysis, and workflow efficiency, the mechanisms through which scientific knowledge is shared have remained largely unchanged for decades [@10.4230/DagMan.1.1.41].
```

Author: Fixed - thank you.

> The prevalent reliance on static PDF formats for research papers starkly contrasts with the complex, data-driven and increasingly computational nature of modern science, creating bottlenecks in knowledge dissemination and uptake.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The widespread reliance on static PDF formats for research papers starkly contrasts with the complex, data-driven and increasingly computational nature of modern science, creating bottlenecks in knowledge dissemination and uptake.
```

Author: Fixed - thank you.

This paper documents some of the design decisions made to address these challenges within two integrated tools: (1) MyST Markdown (Markedly Structured Text, <https://mystmd.org>), a community-run open-source project[^myst-jep], which is a text-based authoring framework that integrates computational content (e.g. Jupyter Notebooks); and (2) Curvenote (<https://curvenote.com>), which is a set of open-source utilities, command-line tools, actions and services[^curvenote] aimed to improve scientific publishing by journals, societies, lab-groups, and individuals.
In this article we provide background, motivation and perspective for our efforts in developing new open-source tools for science communication, with examples ranging from individual authors to journal administrators.

> We give an overview of MyST Markdown but would like to reiterate that MyST Markdown is a community-run project, we do not speak for all of the participants, and the community has varied goals for the project (including API documentation, community guidelines, educational tutorials).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Though we present an overview of MyST Markdown, it should be emphasized that MyST Markdown is a community-run project and Curvenote do not speak for all of the stakeholders; the community has varied goals for the project (including API documentation, community guidelines, educational tutorials).
```

Author: Fixed to something closer to this.

> Our focus in this article is to give our perspectives on scientific writing and publishing and how it intersects with these open-community projects in addition to the open-source efforts that Curvenote is undertaking around scientific publishing.

Reviewer 3: I think this could be reworded to be clearer, but I'm not confident in making a suggestion!

Reviewer 2: I agree with @agoose77 . I think we can be more specific on why.

Author: I have updated the text here, but am not totally clear on what you are asking for!? Can you clarify?

[^myst-jep]: The MyST Markdown project is currently hosted by Executable Books (<https://executablebooks.org>), and we are in the process of moving this into the Jupyter Community through a Jupyter Enhancement Proposal [](https://github.com/jupyter/enhancement-proposals/pull/123).
[^curvenote]:
    Curvenote is a company that provides many different tools for authoring and publishing content, including a collaborative WYSIWYG online editor that can export to MyST Markdown.

>     In this article we only discuss our open-source tools as well as highlight relevant experiences from Curvenote's partners when they relate to general ideas for improving scientific publishing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    In this article, we discuss solely our open-source tools and highlight ideas from working with Curvenote's partners that pertain to improving scientific publishing.
```

Author: Fixed.

> Our goals in developing these integrated tools and workflows address the related challenges of _authoring_ and _publishing_ in the context of computational, open-science documents and lowering the barrier to continuously releasing and iterating on scientific ideas in the open.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In developing these integrated tools and workflows, it is our goal to address the related challenges of _authoring_ and _publishing_ in the context of computational, open-science documents· Through this work, we aim to lowering the barrier to continuously releasing and iterating on scientific ideas in the open.
```

Author: Fixed.

> Introducing authoring tools that allow for structured, interactive and computational content as researchers are writing can additionally change the way it is checked, shared and published — enabling faster iterations and direct ties to reproducible, interactive content.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Introducing authoring tools that can understand and express structured, interactive and computational content has the potential to fundamentally change the way scientific writing is checked, shared and published — enabling faster iterations and direct ties to reproducible, interactive content.
```

Reviewer 3: This drops the "as researchers are writing", which might be a point you wanted to emphasise.

Author: I think it is redundant here - taking your suggestion. thanks!

(sec:structured-science)=

### Authoring Structured Content

> There are currently many challenges for individuals or groups to author research information that can be shared in a structured and rigorous way.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are currently many challenges associated with authoring research information that can be shared in a structured and rigorous way.
```

Author: leaving as is.

By this we mean the things that _structurally_ set a scientific article apart from, for example, a blog post: structured content, cross-references, valid citations with persistent identifiers (PIDs), and standardized metadata for licensing, funding information, authors and affiliations.

> This structured content and metadata as well as the standards behind them are what defines the "scientific record" and enables archiving, discoverability, accessibility, interoperability and the ability to reuse or cite content [@10.1038/sdata.2016.18].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These structured content and metadata, as well as the standards behind them, are what define the "scientific record" and enable archiving, discoverability, accessibility, interoperability and the ability to reuse or cite content [@10.1038/sdata.2016.18].
```

Author: fixed.

One metric for measuring the difficulty of satisfying these scientific standards is to look at the direct costs that are spent on transforming author submissions (e.g. a PDF or a Word Document) into something that conforms to these standards and is ultimately archived.

> In scientific publishing, about 15% of Article Processing Charges (APCs) go to direct publication costs[^pub-costs] [@10.12688/f1000research.27468.2], which provides a _very_ rough global estimate of over USD\$2 billion dollars[^pub-revenue] that is spent on transforming author submissions (e.g. a word-document, LaTeX, or a PDF) into a copyedited, well-formatted, typeset document that can be archived with appropriate metadata [@10.4045/tidsskr.20.0118]; this estimate does not include the approximately USD\$230 million spent on reformatting articles by scientists _before_ publication [@10.1186/s12916-023-02882-y].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In scientific publishing, about 15% of Article Processing Charges (APCs) go to direct publication costs[^pub-costs] [@10.12688/f1000research.27468.2]. When applied to the global publishing industry, this figure suggests that approximately USD\$2 billion dollars[^pub-revenue] is spent on transforming author submissions (e.g. a word-document, LaTeX, or a PDF) into a copy-edited, well-formatted, typeset document that can be archived with appropriate metadata [@10.4045/tidsskr.20.0118]; this estimate does not include the approximately USD\$230 million spent on reformatting articles by scientists _before_ publication [@10.1186/s12916-023-02882-y].
```

I did remove the "very rough" emphasis... we might want that (or use a footnote?).

Author: I like the rewords, updated locally.

> In scientific publishing, about 15% of Article Processing Charges (APCs) go to direct publication costs[^pub-costs] [@10.12688/f1000research.27468.2], which provides a _very_ rough global estimate of over USD\$2 billion dollars[^pub-revenue] that is spent on transforming author submissions (e.g. a word-document, LaTeX, or a PDF) into a copyedited, well-formatted, typeset document that can be archived with appropriate metadata [@10.4045/tidsskr.20.0118]; this estimate does not include the approximately USD\$230 million spent on reformatting articles by scientists _before_ publication [@10.1186/s12916-023-02882-y].

Reviewer 2: I do like this analysis!

Author: 🚀 It is crazy, and hopefully something that can be radically changed over the next decade. :)

> Many of these processes are hidden from authors[^hidden-processes] as well as actionable access to many of the benefits of structured data beyond citation graphs (e.g. "How many citations did this paper get?").

Reviewer 3: What does 
> actionable access

mean here?

My inference is that we're saying both the processes _and_ benefits of structured data authorship are lost. If so, let's reword.

[^pub-revenue]: Global revenue in scientific publishing is around USD$19 billion, with over 50% of the market controlled by Elsevier, Wiley, Taylor & Francis, Springer Nature and SAGE [@10.4045/tidsskr.20.0118].
[^pub-costs]: Direct publication costs include: checking of manuscript, copyediting, typesetting, formatting figures/graphs/tables, XML and metadata preparation, and handling corrections [@10.12688/f1000research.27468.2].
[^hidden-processes]:
    Much of the production publication processes are hidden from scientific authors, with typesetting focused on cross-references, linking citations, ensuring citations have appropriate IDs (e.g. DOIs) as well as conversion to JATS XML (a NISO standard for archiving scientific articles), metadata preparation to [CrossRef](https://crossref.org), and archiving services like LOCKSS (<https://lockss.org>) and CLOCKSS (<https://clockss.org>).
    Additionally, the many proprietary services and tools to create both online and PDF outputs of the authors work that are nicely typeset for reading on the web or online.

> One goal of the MyST Markdown project is to _dramatically_ reduce these direct-publication costs[^zero-cost] and directly provide structured data as an output of authoring as well as the ability to export content in a variety of formats including HTML, PDF and JATS-XML (a NISO standard for archiving scientific articles).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One goal of the MyST Markdown project is to _dramatically_ reduce these direct-publication costs[^zero-cost] and provide direct unfettered access to structured data as an output of authoring. It aims to leverage the availability of this structured representation to export content to a wide variety of formats including HTML, PDF and JATS-XML (a NISO standard for archiving scientific articles).
```

Let me know how `unfettered` sits.

Author: like it!

> In this article, we will demonstrate that having structured data throughout authoring leads to a number of novel reading and authoring experiences [e.g. @eg:hover], can provide new opportunities for reuse and quality checks when publishing [e.g. @eg:checks].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this article, we will demonstrate that having structured data throughout authoring can lead to a number of novel reading and authoring experiences [e.g. @eg:hover], and can provide new opportunities for reuse and quality checks when publishing [e.g. @eg:checks].
```

Author: fixed.

> In this article, we will demonstrate that having structured data throughout authoring leads to a number of novel reading and authoring experiences [e.g. @eg:hover], can provide new opportunities for reuse and quality checks when publishing [e.g. @eg:checks].

Reviewer 2: I am wondering how the hover example would look like in static pdf? Also, nitpicky but currently the `[e.g. @eg:checks]` is shown as Example 3. Since the previous example (hover) is Example 1, should this be Example 2 instead of 3?

Author: I have now introduced them in order, and removed the `e.g.` which is a bit redundant.

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/aeccb670-a70d-472d-946d-6ee58ad40879)

My plan is to make a different figure for PDF. ... !

> Furthermore, these transformation processes can be run _continuously_ opening the possibilities for faster feedback [See @sec:continuous-science], iterative drafts, small tweaks and versioned improvements that otherwise would not be worth the time and cost.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Furthermore, these transformation processes can be run _continuously_, opening the possibilities for faster feedback [See @sec:continuous-science], iterative drafts, small tweaks and versioned improvements that otherwise would not be worth the time and cost.
```

Author: fixed.

[^zero-cost]:
    The cost of transforming author submissions to produce structured content and metadata should approach zero, at least for a subset of users.
    For example, _technical_ users who can use open-source command-line tools like MyST Markdown and GitHub.
    This has been shown to be the case for the Journal of Open Source Software (JOSS), for example, which has very low direct-publication costs per article [@10.7717/peerj-cs.147].

(sec:computational-articles)=

### Computational Articles

A compounding challenge to scientific publishing that we are exploring through MyST Markdown and Curvenote is how to deeply integrate computational workflows and content into science communication to promote interactive explorations and reproducible practices.
There are a host of challenges from user-interface design, to maintenance, to archiving computational content.

> Many other tools have worked on aspects of integrating computation into scientific articles, notably R-Markdown [@10.1201/9781138359444] and it's successor Quarto (<https://quarto.org>); both of these projects have similar aims to MyST Markdown.

Reviewer 2: I am curious whether the paper mentions differences between curvenote/myst and these referred tools

Author: I have added a few sentences on comparing the projects more specifically.

>MyST is influenced by [reStructuredText (RST)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/reStructuredText) and [Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org) – pulling on the nomenclature and introducing additional standards where appropriate.
> There are also many intentional syntax similarities of MyST Markdown to R-Markdown [@10.1201/9781138359444], Pandoc, and Quarto (<https://quarto.org>), especially in citation syntax and frontmatter structure.
> MyST Markdown is written in Javascript and builds upon the `unified` community of tools, output formats and transforms, whereas Quarto builds upon Pandoc written in Haskell + Lua; there are also differences in approach in the legal and community foundations (Pandoc and Quarto are GPL vs. MyST which is a more permissive MIT license; MyST is a community-driven project whereas Quarto is driven by a single corporate entity).

From a user-experience goals perspective, we are interested in questions such as:

> - how to make a change in a notebook figure and have that immediately show up in a document?
> - how to ensure that a p-value, for example, is computed and inserted directly from a computation, rather than through copy-and-paste?
> - how to expose interactivity and exploration that a researcher often has when analyzing a data-set?
> - how to provide and launch archived interactive computing environments?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- How can an author make a change in a notebook figure and have that immediately show up in a document?
- How can a researcher ensure that a p-value, for example, is computed and inserted directly from a computation, rather than through copy-and-paste?
- How can a reader access the interactivity and exploration that a researcher leveraged during the analysis of a dataset?
- How can the scientific community archive interactive documents, and expose them to future readers?
```

This is a big change, please do check you're happy with the language. My main focus was making this a user-story.

Author: I have changed the wording of these.

[^additional-benefits]:
    In addition to increasing speed and robustness, continuous delivery practices also demonstrated that the elite teams spent 20% more time on new work, had 5-20% less manual work, and were 1.8x more likely to recommend their team as a great place to work ([2018 DORA Report](https://services.google.com/fh/files/misc/state-of-devops-2018.pdf)).
    These numbers are intriguing when contrasted to researchers, where (a) scientists already work 53.96 hours a week on average, and only about 36% of their time is actually spent on research (8% on grants, 32% on teaching, and 24% on service) [@10.1016/j.econedurev.2007.04.002]; and (b) graduate students are six times more likely to experience depression than the general population [@10.1038/nbt.4089].

The analogy between scientific publishing and software releases is imperfect and non-prescriptive (i.e. scientific research is very different than developing a product).

> However, the analogy is illustrative in areas where there is a focus on iterations, smaller changesets and releasing in-progress work as soon as possible to get feedback from peers (i.e. scientific peer-review) or users (in the case of software products).

Reviewer 2: Glad you mentioned the difference between the two :)

Author: Thanks - lots of things to learn and think about in the analogy, but certainly not prescriptive.

The speed of scientific progress depends _on part_ on the speed of iteration and feedback.

> The time it takes for the peer-review process is over three months, in high profile journals like Nature that time has almost doubled over the past decade [@Powell2016Does].

Reviewer 2: Do you think using curvenote would reduce this? If yes, then perhaps you can elaborate

Author: I think that changes in publishing practices can reduce this -- i.e. the publish-review-curate model, where you publish a preprint first, archive that, and then support the review and curation.

I have added a link to prereview at the end of this paragraph which is doing more in this space than Curvenote  at the moment.

This would be very interesting to try at SciPy next year if you are game. :)

Rejections are anywhere from 50-90% [@10.12688/f1000research.27468.2] with valuable reviews and expertise coming months or even years after the work is completed[^time-to-feedback].

> There are wide spread efforts in scientific publishing that focus both on sharing smaller components of research (e.g. FigShare [@10.7771/2380-176X.7269], Octopus [@10.17863/CAM.96819], MicroPublications [@10.1186/2041-1480-5-28], NanoPublications [@10.3233/ISU-2010-0613], Protocols [@10.1371/journal.pbio.1002538], PreRegistrations [@10.1073/pnas.1708274114]) as well as sharing research sooner in the life cycle especially through preprints, for example, ASAPbio's mission to support "rapid open sharing, discussion, and collaboration around research" and promotion of "Preprints in Progress" [@10.1371/journal.pgen.1008565].

Reviewer 2: I am wondering whether OpenReview also fits in this series of efforts.

Author: I have added a comment about PREreview and a citation to https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-00613-4.

[^time-to-feedback]:
    In @10.1371/journal.pgen.1008565, they describe the importance of adopting preprints, as the "overall peer review process can take years".
    For the programmers reading this, it is worth a mental comparison to the pain of a pull-request being open for years.
    Having relevant feedback that is close to the time of implementation or writing is invaluable.

We refer to these related concepts as "_continuous science_", adopting language and concepts from "continuous integration and deployment".
The mechanisms to support continuous processes are through automation, rapid feedback on errors, and focusing on small, rapid changesets to accelerate feedback from peers.
This gives us a technical lens to assess, for example:

- How can you assess and test that the structure of a document applies to editorial rules?
- How long does it take to get feedback if your metadata or DOI is incorrect?
- When a computational figures or data output changes, how long does it take to integrate that into your document?

In science there is a highly manual, absurdly expensive and disconnected process between authoring and publishing.

> By moving to continuous practices and investing in the appropriate infrastructure to support _continuous science_ we believe there is an opportunity to accelerate scientific discovery by multiple orders of magnitude while simultaneously increasing reproducibility and robustness of the underlying science.

Reviewer 2: In a similar sense, one of the major benefits of this approach is more transparency to the research and review process.

Author: Changed to:

> increasing reproducibility, robustness and transparency of the underlying science.

There are two inter-related capabilities that are necessary for this transition:

1. authoring mediums that support data, computation and structured content without the need for expensive typesetting; and
2. publishing that is open and accessible to researchers at a variety of scales – individual publishing, lab-groups, societies and institutions.

Through the lens of MyST Markdown and Curvenote, this paper will explore how these tools can help to address critical gaps in current scientific publishing practices.
Our motivation is to enhance the _speed_ and _impact_ of research dissemination, fostering a scientific ecosystem that is more collaborative, reproducible, and equipped to tackle the urgent global challenges of our time.

(sec:authoring)=

## Authoring Tools

MyST Markdown (Markedly Structured Text, <https://mystmd.org>) is a community-driven markup language that is a superset of [CommonMark](https://commonmark.org/) (a standard form of Markdown) with special syntax for citations, cross-references, and block and inline extension points called "directives" and "roles".

> The block-level content provides multi-line containers surrounded by either backticks or colons; examples include callout panels, figures, equations and tables (see [documentation](https://mystmd.org)).

Reviewer 3: Maybe xref to our mystmd guide here?

Author: added.

Specifically, the ability to add persistent identifiers (PIDs) and links to other structured content; hover previews to show details on demand; integrating live computational content and interactive figures; and exporting to many different formats including those used by scholarly publishing.

### Utility of Links and Identifiers

In MyST Markdown, citations can be added inline using `@cite-key`, following Pandoc-style syntax and referencing a BibTeX file in a project.
It is also possible to directly link to DOIs using `@10.5281/zenodo.6476040`, which will create a hover reference [@10.5281/zenodo.6476040] as well as a references section at the bottom of the page.

This enhanced-links concept can be extended to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia), RRIDs, RORs, GitHub issues or code, and other scientific databases to augment writing.
For example, the link `<rrid:SCR_008394>` becomes <rrid:SCR_008394>, with rich-metadata and citations created.
Wikipedia links come with previews, for example, `<wiki:gravitational_waves>` becomes <wiki:gravitational_waves>.

> GitHub links to pull-requests also give hover information (for example, this example admonition was implemented in [#87](https://github.com/executablebooks/myst-theme/pull/87)).

Reviewer 3: The 
> this example admonition

is no longer directly below/above this paragraph.

Author: Fixed.

In some cases, it is possible to collapse all computational information into a single "Computational Article", and visually hide the code to focus on the narrative or presentational flow [c.f. @elife-era].
This approach is appropriate for tutorials or the reproduction of visualizations rather than reproduction of a distinct detailed methodology that requires its own explanation and/or lengthy computation.
However, given the possibility of publishing a Computational Article, even in these cases authors can rethink how to communicate their work and prepare specific visualizations and compact results datasets to take advantage of the format.
Another approach is to include supplemental notebooks that can capture those individual steps [c.f. @10.1029/2023EA003458], and [transclude](wiki:transclude) content [@fig:reuse].
Both approaches are appropriate in different circumstances, and depends on the goal of the communication, nature of the research, speed of execution, and if individual steps require dedicated narrative explanation.

:::{figure} ./images/reuse-jupyter-outputs.png
:label: fig:reuse
A schematic of embedding content from Jupyter Notebooks into an article.

> The purple and orange components, interactive figure or other computational outputs, are created in a computational notebook and subsequently used in other narrative or presentation-focused scientific article.

Reviewer 2: What's the difference between the middle and right sketches? Also, blue, green, and red colors are not explained, so it's probably better to explain or simplify by reducing the number of colors (especially red vs. blue because I don't know what the difference should be)

Here we are aiming at a much richer, structured information commons that moves beyond just tracking scientific metadata towards easy-to-use tools that reuse scientific content.

::::{prf:example} Computational Reproducibility and Interactivity
:label: eg:interactivity
MyST allows for the full reproducible environment to be specified (via REES) and reproduced through tools like MyBinder.
Figures can be integrated directly into articles, pressing a button to launch live and interactive figures that build upon the Jupyter ecosystem.
These tools build on the Jupyter protocols and reuse components from the JupyterLab ecosystem, extending that into various pages using a package called [`thebe`](https://github.com/executablebooks/thebe).

```{figure} ./images/thebe.*
:label: fig:thebe
Embedded notebook cells with live computation directly in an articles with computation backed by Jupyter.
These can be running on BinderHub or directly in your browser through JupyterLite.
```

::::

### Single Source to Many Outputs

> These capabilities of cross-references, typography and embedding visualizations and data-frames are complemented by an single-source export system that supports professional article templates and JATS XML [@fig:export].

Reviewer 2: an -> a, or drop

Author: Thanks, fixed!

> This is referred to as single-source publishing [c.f. @10.1109/MITP.2003.1176491], however, many implementations in scientific publishing focus first on manual translation to XML (e.g. from Word or LaTeX), rather than on an author-facing implementation.

Reviewer 2: Do we need c.f.?

Author: I have removed these.

The native way that MyST is represented is through content-as-data, a collection of JSON files that represent the full documents and all associated metadata (if you are reading this online, you can add a `.json` to the URL to access the content).
This MyST content may be served alongside an independent website theme, which dynamically creates HTML based on these JSON files (very similar to XML-based single source publishing [@10.1109/MITP.2003.1176491], but using modern web-tooling).
This server-side approach has a number of advantages, in that it allows you to maintain a journal/site theme, without having to upgrade or rebuild all content as would be required by static tooling.
It also puts content addressability as a first class concern (via the `.json`), enabling global cross referencing and opening up opportunities for varied publishing models in future.
This is the approach that we take with Curvenote journals, and provide managed services to maintain journal sites, manage and curate content, as well as provide the editorial management tools and workflows.

You can also easily self-host a MyST Markdown site using GitHub Pages.

> To create a GitHub pages output you can run `myst init --gh-pages`, which will walk you through the steps of creating a GitHub action to publish your content as a static website.

Reviewer 2: a GitHub pages -> GitHub pages

Author: Fixed, thanks!

> In this scenario, a static HTML site is built from your content which can be hosted as any other static website, while some of he advantages of dynamic hosting are lost, it is an easy and accessible way for individuals to self-publish.

Reviewer 2: he advantages -> the advantages

Author: Fixed! Thank you.

In 2024, Curvenote was asked to improve our integrations to GitHub to support the SciPy Proceedings and re-imagine a MyST based publishing approach that uses GitHub for open-peer-review, implementing a submission, editorial and peer review process with GitHub issues, PRs and actions as a fabric.

> The process previously used technology shared with the Journal of Open Source Software (JOSS), which popularized this approach [@10.7717/peerj-cs.147].

Reviewer 4: Just a factual correction here: the SciPy proceedings tools were implemented around 2010 (I'd have to go check the exact year), and included the proceedings builder (RST to IEEE PDF) and a preview build server (procbuild). The JOSS Whedon bot may have been added into the mix at some point, but SciPy's open, GitHub-based proceedings review, text-format paper build tooling etc. predates JOSS by a significant margin.

/cc @jarrodmillman who has a better memory than me, and who published the first proceedings

Author: Thank you @stefanv, I will update that to include some of the history. When I was writing that sentence I was only trying to capture the current state rather than evolution, but it does come across as misrepresenting that history a bit. Not my intention!

Reviewer 4: Of course, never thought so! Just think it's worth mentioning, since it was novel at the time (and, in a sad statement about the publishing industry, still is, to a large extent).

Reviewer 5: I would add that the JOSS Whedon bot was customized and renamed "scoobies" for SciPy Proceedings in 2021. What scoobies did is largely superseded by how we are now using GitHub projects. Here's a listing of the "scoobies help" output:
```
# List all available commands
@scoobies help

# Show our community Code of Conduct and Guidelines
@scoobies code of conduct

# Add to this issue's reviewers list
@scoobies add @username to reviewers

# Remove from this issue's reviewers list
@scoobies remove @username from reviewers

# Assign a user as the editor of this submission
@scoobies assign @username as editor

# Remove the editor assigned to this submission
@scoobies remove editor

# Add a user to this issue's assignees list
@scoobies add assignee: @username

# Remove a user from this issue's assignees list
@scoobies remove assignee: @username

# Builds paper
@scoobies build paper

# Checks build status
@scoobies build status

# Check the references of the paper for missing DOIs
# Optionally, it can be run on a non-default branch 
@scoobies check references
@scoobies check references from branch custom-branch-name

# Label issue with: paper
@scoobies mark paper

# Label issue with: needs-review. Remove labels: unready, needs-more-review, pending-comment, ready
@scoobies mark needs review

# Label issue with: needs-more-review. Remove labels: unready, needs-review, pending-comment, ready
@scoobies mark needs more review

# Label issue with: pending-comment. Remove labels: unready, needs-review, needs-more-review, ready
@scoobies mark pending comment

# Label issue with: ready. Remove labels: unready, needs-review, needs-more-review, pending-comment
@scoobies mark ready

# Label issue with: unready. Remove labels: needs-review, needs-more-review, pending-comment, ready
@scoobies mark not ready

# Label issue with: does_not_build:server
@scoobies mark server fail

# Remove labels: does_not_build:server
@scoobies mark server success
```

Reviewer 5: @mepa hosted scoobies on Heroku, I believe. And I hosted procbuild on a VM at RENCI using a letsencrypt/certbot cert. There was overhead/maintenance involved.

Reviewer 4: I don't recall where we first hosted procbuild in 2023, maybe on a Berkeley machine or on new.scipy.org, but I know @mpacer around 2018 hosted it on Heroku as well.

Reviewer 6: I'll add more detail to what @stefanv and @cbcunc have already mentioned just for interest. (I'm not implying it needs to be incorporated into the current paper.)

First, here is a nice blog post by @deniederhut about the SciPy partnership with JOSS (which was initiated in 2020): https://blog.neater-hut.com/scipy-is-partnering-with-joss-part-1.html

From the SciPy Proceedings Committee side, Dillon integrated JOSS's review management bot in time for the 2021 proceedings review period, and deployed it on Heroku free tier in both 2021 and 2022. By 2023, Heroku had [removed its free product plans](https://help.heroku.com/RSBRUH58/removal-of-heroku-free-product-plans-faq) so I looked for potential free options but ended up deploying it on Heroku.

Reviewer 7: > SciPy's open, GitHub-based proceedings review, text-format paper build tooling etc. predates JOSS by a significant margin

Indeed, Arfon has cited SciPy as an influence on the design of JOSS's publication system

Reviewer 8: Oh that great! I thought JOSS came first and SciPy was influenced by it.

These can be run in less than a few seconds both locally and through GitHub actions [@fig:actions], which provides a user interface on the checks.
```

::::

(sec:automation)=

### Automated Actions

Upon submission of there are a number of checks that are run and a submission or draft is deployed to Curvenote's platform, which stores the structured MyST project.
We utilized GitHub Actions to automate initial checks and generate previews of submissions (via https://github.com/curvenote/actions).
The actions automatically generate a preview of the manuscript exactly as it would appear in publication using MyST Markdown, and these are linked within the pull request comments for easy access by reviewers [@fig:actions].

```{figure} ./images/gh-commits-and-checks.png
:label: fig:actions
:class: framed
An example of a comment by a GitHub action, which shows the checks and preview of the article directly.
The checks in this example have promoted the author to improve metadata, see [](https://github.com/scipy-conference/scipy_proceedings/pull/911).
```

> ### Enabling Researchers

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we can rephrase this to be more specific

Author: I have changed this to "continuous practices" and updated the text around this to talk about the combination of a simplified authoring experience and integrated checks and automation through actions.

> Although SciPy submissions are made in a central repository, the Curvenote checks can be setup on any repository.

Reviewer 2: This makes the whole section sound like this is specific to SciPy, which I think it's not?

Author: I have revamped this section, and removed the references to scipy, because as you note, they are much more general.

As MyST Markdown brings a researcher's writing back into a simple text based format, and if they are working with Jupyter notebooks, integrates directly with their computational analysis and results, a researcher's manuscript can be easily created and maintained as an integral part of their research code base and updated in lock step with it.

> Imagine writing your next paper for submission to SciPy in a way where your draft was automatically rebuilt with the latest figures and data tables on every push to `main`, and any issues that you would hit on submission are flagged as they happen and so are more easily fixed, in context.

Reviewer 2: I think mentioning SciPy is good but we might want to emphasize that this is not just for SciPy. We can use SciPy as a case study example.

Author: I have updated this section considerably - thanks for the feedback here!
